---
layout: page
title: 1984
---


# 1984 Outline

## Big Picture



*   There’s 3 classes of people: High, Middle, Low. Sometimes the Middle has a revolution and overthrows the High (eg American Revolution).
*   Now, with machine production, there no longer has to be classes, everyone can be prosperous.
*   But the current High want to cling to their power forever, and they have to take more drastic measures than ever. They
    *   create the Thought Police/telescreens/surveillance
        *   prevents Upper Party from becoming liberal/skeptical
        *   prevents Lower Party from getting power hungry
    *   alter the past 
        *   they are never caught being wrong (infallibility of the Party)
        *   maintain an appearance of rising standard of living (no point for comparison, rations always met)
    *   practice continuous warfare
        *   consumes surplus products → maintains standard of living → low doesn’t get educated → preserves hierarchical structure
*   There are 4 ways a regime can end
    *   external threat (continuous warfare neutralizes)
    *   revolt from oppressed Low (proles have no historical point of comparison for standard of living, Party controls the past)
    *   new Middle revolution (thought police, doublethink)
    *   ruling class High loses interest (thought police, doublethink)
*   There’s 3 groups of people who could overthrow the system (but don’t)
    *   young people: only rebel _within the system_
    *   old people: remember how things used to be, but don’t see the big picture
    *   the proles: kept uneducated and entertained, treated like animals, only notice petty grievances 


## Themes


### Power is an end, not a means

[ It’s not for the good of the people, it’s for its own sake: it is the Why. They’ve just perfected the totalitarian state. They are the first to have the will and the technology necessary. ]

“The past not only changed, but changed continuously. What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that he had never clearly understood _why_ the huge imposture was undertaken. The immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the ultimate motive was mysterious. ... _I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY_” (61).

"The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once more, and then stop. As usual, the High were to be turned out by the Middle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscious strategy, the High would be able to maintain their position permanently" (159). 

"The new aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists, technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists, teachers, journalists, and professional politicians. These people, whose origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of the working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of monopoly industry and centralized government. As compared with their opposite numbers in past ages, **they were less avaricious, less tempted by luxury, hungrier for pure power,** and, above all, more conscious of what they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition" (160). 

“All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified or because they grew soft. Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed to adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown, or they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have used force, and once again were overthrown” (167).

“He knew in advance what O’Brien would say: that the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good of the majority. That it sought power because men in the mass were frail, cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face truth, and must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than themselves. That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness ... That the Party was ... doing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of others.

‘You are ruling over us for our own good,’ [Winston] said feebly. ‘You believe that human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore -’ ... 

‘That was stupid, Winston, stupid!’ [O’Brien] said” (208).

"**The Party seeks power entirely for its own sake.** We are not interested in the good of others; we are interested solely in power. Not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness; only power, pure power” (208). 

“We are different from the oligarchies of the past, in that we know what we are doing. All the others, even those that resembled ourselves, were cowards and hypocrites. The German Nazis and Russian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they never had the courage to recognize their own motives. They pretended, perhaps even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where human beings would be equal and free. We are not like that” (208).

“We know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it. **Power is not a means; it is an end.** One does not establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish the dictatorship" (208). 


### To the Party, the past and indeed reality are not objective

[ Truth: the only evidence of facts are memories and written records. To change facts: can use mechanical means to change written records, but you need psychological control to change people’s memories. ]

"The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is subsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary. **The subsidiary reason is that the Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditions partly because he has no standards of comparison**. He must be cut off from the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and that the average level of material comfort is constantly rising. But by far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the need to safeguard the infallibility of the Party" (166). 


### mutability of the past

"The past, he reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed. For how could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no record outside your own memory" (28). 

“And when memory failed and written records were falsified—when that happened, the claim of the Party to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted, because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard against which it could be tested" (72).

“As soon as all the corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number of the Times had been assembled and collated, that number would be reprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on the files in its stead. This process of continuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, films, sound tracks, cartoons, photographs—to every kind of literature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or ideological significance. Day by day and almost minute by minute the past was brought up to date" (31). 

“Past events, it is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in written record and in human memories. The past is whatever the records and the memories agree upon. And since the Party is in full control of all records, and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it” (166).


### no existence of external reality

"In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitable that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their position demanded it. **Not merely the validity of experience, but the very existence of external reality was tacitly denied by their philosophy.** The heresy of heresies was common sense. And what was terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be right. For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or that the force of gravity works? Or that the past is unchangeable? **If both the past and the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself is controllable—what then**" (62). 

“The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It was their final, most essential command. ... And yet he was in the right! They were wrong and he was right. The obvious, silly, and the true had got to be defended. Truisms are true, hold onto that! The solid world exists, its laws do not change. Stones are hard, water is wet, objects unsupported fall toward the earth’s center” (62).

"Does the past exist concretely, in space? Is there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past is still happening?”" (194). 

“Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else. Not in the individual mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes; only in the mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal” (195).

"The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind—surely there must be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not been exposed long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which he had forgotten. A faint smile twitched the corners of O’Brien’s mouth as he looked down at him. “I told you, Winston,” he said, “that metaphysics is not your strong point. The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. But this is not solipsism. Collective solipsism, if you like" (210). 

"The fallacy was obvious. It presupposed that somewhere or other, outside oneself, there was a “real” world where “real” things happened. But how could there be such a world? What knowledge have we of anything, save through our own minds? All happenings are in the mind. **Whatever happens in all minds, truly happens**" (220). 


### sanity is not statistical

"He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself was a lunatic. Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one. At one time it had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun; today, to believe that the past is unalterable. He might be _alone_ in holding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic. But the thought of being a lunatic did not greatly trouble him; the horror was that he might also be wrong" (62). 

"Being in a minority, even a minority of one, did not make you mad. There was truth and there was untruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, you were not mad" (169). 


### Private thoughts are policed

[ only important for Party members, and to prevent a Revolution or liberalism ]


### telescreens and surveillance

"The telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winston made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it; moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. How often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to. You had to live—did live, from habit that became instinct—in the assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in darkness, every movement scrutinized" (3).

"Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be concealed forever. You might dodge successfully for a while, even for years, but sooner or later they were bound to get you" (15). 

"One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme will be vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too plainly. The Party does not like such people. One day he will disappear. It is written in his face" (41). 

"The invention of print, however, made it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radio carried the process further. With the development of television, and the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, **private life came to an end**. Every citizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching, could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels of communication closed. The possibility of enforcing not only complete obedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion on all subjects, now existed for the first time" (161). 

"In a Party member, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion on the most unimportant subject can be tolerated. **A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought Police**. Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone ... His friendships, his relaxations, his behavior toward his wife and children, the expression of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even the characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized" (164). 


### Newspeak

"“Don’t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought? In the end **we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be no words in which to express it** ... Even now, of course, there’s no reason or excuse for committing thoughtcrime. It’s merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control. But in the end there won’t be any need even for that. The Revolution will be complete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak,”" (41). 


### doublethink

[ cognitive dissonance, reconciling contradictions ]

"Doublethink means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one’s mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them. The Party intellectual knows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knows that he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of doublethink he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated" (167). 


### mutability of inner feelings

your feelings are the hardest thing to indoctrinate, distinct from your thoughts

what you do -> what you say -> what you think -> what you feel

"“I don’t mean confessing. Confession is not betrayal. What you say or do doesn’t matter; only feelings matter. If they could make me stop loving you—that would be the real betrayal.”" (130). 

“It’s the one thing they can’t do. They can make you say anything - _anything_ - but they can’t make you believe it. They can’t get inside you” (130).

"Facts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden. They could be tracked down by inquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture. But if the object was not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did it ultimately make? **They could not alter your feelings; for that matter you could not alter them yourself, even if you wanted to. They could lay bare in the utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought; but the inner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remained impregnable**" (131). 

"The command of the old despotisms was ‘Thou shalt not.’ The command of the totalitarians was ‘Thou shalt.’ Our command is ‘Thou art.’" (201). 


### Continuous warfare preserves the (low) standard of living and the hierarchical structure of society

[ to use up the goods and direct people’s rage at an external enemy

aims: 



*   to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living
*   preserve the hierarchical structure of society ]

"War, however, is no longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early decades of the twentieth century. It is a warfare of limited aims between combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause for fighting, and are not divided by any genuine ideological difference" (146). 

"Goods must be produced, but they must not be distributed. And in practice the only way of achieving this was by continuous warfare. The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives, but of the products of human labor" (150). 

“When war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity. Technological progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or disregarded” (155).

"In our own day they are not fighting against one another at all. The war is waged by each ruling group against its own subjects, and **the object of the war is not to make or prevent conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society intact**" (156). 


### Automation is an opportunity for utopia

[ But was denied by those in power, who wanted to maintain that power. Instead, used surplus resources on pointless wars ]

"If the machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt, illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generations. And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of automatic process—by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible not to distribute—the machine did raise the living standards of the average human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries" (149). 

"But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the destruction—indeed, in some sense was the destruction—of a hierarchical society. In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough to eat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed a motorcar or even an airplane, the most obvious and perhaps the most important form of inequality would already have disappeared. If it once became general, wealth would confer no distinction. It was possible, no doubt, to imagine a society in which wealth, in the sense of personal possessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while power remained in the hands of a small privileged caste. But in practice such a society could not long remain stable. For if leisure and security were enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for themselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or later realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweep it away. **In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of poverty and ignorance**" (149). 

"The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of doublethink, this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized by the directing brains of the Inner Party) is **to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living**" (148). 

“In earlier ages, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirable. Inequality had been the price of civilization. With the development of machine production, however, the case was altered: … it was no longer necessary for [humans] to live at different social or economic levels… But by the [1930s], all the main currents of political thought were authoritarian. **The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the moment when it became realizable. **Every new political theory … led back to hierarchy and regimentation” (160).


### Younger generation accepts the Party as unalterable

Younger generation (Julia) fights the system within the existing rules. Those old enough to remember the old world (Winston) want to abolish the current system and go back.

"Any kind of organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure, struck her as stupid. The clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all the same. He wondered vaguely how many others like her there might be in the younger generation—people who had grown up in the world of the Revolution, knowing nothing else, **accepting the Party as something unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simply evading it**, as a rabbit dodges a dog" (102). 

"She would not accept it as a law of nature that the individual is always defeated. In a way she realized that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possible to construct a secret world in which you could live as you chose" (106). 

"She had grown up since the Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the Fifties and Sixties. Such a thing as an independent political movement was outside her imagination; and in any case **the Party was invincible. It would always exist, and it would always be the same.** You could only rebel against it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of violence such as killing somebody or blowing something up" (120). 

"Often she was ready to accept the official mythology, simply because **the difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her**. She believed, for instance, having learnt it at school, that the Party had invented airplanes. (In his own school-days, Winston remembered, in the late Fifties, it was only the helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years later, when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the airplane; one generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when he told her that airplanes had been in existence before he was born and long before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting. After all, what did it matter who had invented airplanes" (120). 

"Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudent forgeries that he committed there. Such things did not appear to horrify her. She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought of lies becoming truths" (121). 

"Whenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, the mutability of the past and the denial of objective reality, and to use Newspeak words, she became bored and confused and said that she never paid any attention to that kind of thing. One knew that it was all rubbish, so why let oneself be worried by it" (122). 


### Hope lies in the proles

"If there is hope [wrote Winston] it lies in the proles" (54). 

"But the proles, if only they could somehow become conscious of their own strength, would have no need to conspire" (54).

"no attempt was made to indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party. It was not desirable that the proles should have strong political feelings. All that was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working hours or shorter rations. And even when they became discontented, as they sometimes did, their discontent led nowhere, because, being without general ideas, they could only focus it on petty specific grievances. The larger evils invariably escaped their notice" (55). 

"There was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produced rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime, and astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a special kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator" (33). [ keep the proles distracted with entertainment/sensationalization ]

“What mattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesture, an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in itself. The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in this condition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they were loyal to one another. ... The proles had stayed human. They had not hardened inside. They had held onto the primitive emotions which he himself had to relearn by conscious effort” (129). [ ancestral code ]

"From the proletarians nothing is to be feared. Left to themselves, they will continue from generation to generation and from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only without any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world could be other than it is. They could only become dangerous if the advance of industrial technique made it necessary to educate them more highly; but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, the level of popular education is actually declining. What opinions the masses hold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference. They can be granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect" (164). 


## Motifs


### Sex is rebellion

[ sex discouraged of Party members except to procreate, no makeup/perfume ]

"He hated her because she was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with her and would never do so," (12). 

"The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming loyalties which it might not be able to control. Its real, undeclared purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act" (51). 

“**The sexual act, successfully performed, was rebellion.** Desire was thoughtcrime” (53).

"In the old days, he thought, a man looked at a girl’s body and saw that it was desirable, and that was the end of the story. But you could not have pure love or pure lust nowadays. No emotion was pure, because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred. Their embrace had been a battle, the climax a victory. It was a blow struck against the Party. It was a political act" (98). 

"“When you make love you’re using up energy; and afterwards you feel happy and don’t give a damn for anything. They can’t bear you to feel like that. They want you to be bursting with energy all the time. All this marching up and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour" (104). 


### Alcohol is an opiate

"Four, five, six—seven times they met during the month of June. **Winston had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours. He seemed to have lost the need for it.** He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsided, leaving only a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits of coughing in the early morning had stopped. The process of life had ceased to be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at the telescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice" (118).

“He took us his glass and sniffed at it. The stuff grew not less but more horrible with every mouthful he drank. But it had become the element he swam in. It was his life, his death, and his resurrection. It was gin that sank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morning” (232).


### O’Brien is an enemy that’s always one step ahead

“His heart sank as he thought of the enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party intellectual would overthrow him in debate, the subtle arguments which he would not be able to understand, much less answer” (62).

“When he spoke his voice was gentle and patient. He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a priest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish” (192).	

"O’Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself. There was no idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O’Brien had not long ago known, examined, and rejected. His mind contained Winston’s mind. But in that case how could it be true that O’Brien was mad? It must be he, Winston, who was mad" (201). 

"“that it did not matter whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who understood you and could be talked to? You were right. I enjoy talking to you. Your mind appeals to me. It resembles my own mind except that you happen to be insane" (204). 


### Nostalgia for the past

[ prole lady singing, paperweight, the room upstairs at Mr. Charrington’s, coffee, chocolate, love, family ]

"And though, of course, it grew worse as one’s body aged, was it not a sign that this was not the natural order of things, if one’s heart sickened at the discomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness of one’s socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty soap, the cigarettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange evil tastes? Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind of** ancestral memory** that things had once been different" (47). 

“It _might_ be true that the average human being was better off now than he had been before the Revolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different” (57).

“What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different from the present one” (74).

"the room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of **ancestral memory.** It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in a room like this, in an armchair beside an open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob, utterly alone, utterly secure, with nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock" (75). 

“Wine was a thing he had read and dreamed about. Like the glass paperweight or Mr. Charrington’s half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts” (134).

“What mattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesture, an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in itself” (129).


## Plot

Part 1 (world-building)



1. writing in diary (Two Minutes of Hate, thinks O’Brien on his side)
2. visits Mrs Parsons, her kids; remembers a dream from 7 years ago with O’Brien
3. dream of mother and dark haired girl, Physical Jerks
4. description of Winston’s job rectifying the news
5. in canteen, talking to Syme (intelligent), Parsons (stupid)
6. Winston writes about visit w prostitute (sexual ideology of party), thinks about ex-wife Katharine
7. Winston writes about the proles/ideology toward proles, the past (evidence of a lie: Jones, Aaronson, Rutherford)
8. Beer with the old man & revisits antique shop (Charrington), sees girl w dark hair

Part 2 (plot with Julia)



1. girl w dark hair gives note to Winston (I love you), finds her a few days later in the canteen, they meet at Victory Square, they arrange meeting in nature
2. They meet in nature/have sex
3. they meet in a belfry (she thinks the world is fixed but you can break the rules to be happy, Winston thinks you can’t be happy until the world goes back to the way it was)
4. Meeting with Julia at Charrington’s shop, she brought real coffee and put on makeup (illegal for Party members)
5. Conversation w Julia at Charrington (she doesn’t care what is true)
6. O’Brien gives Winston his address
7. Winston dreams story of leaving his mom; realizes as long as he wants to stay human/maintain his internal feelings, he beats the Party
8. Winston and Julia visit O’Brien and confess their disloyalty to the Party, he connects them to the Brotherhood
9. During Hate Week, the enemy changes. Winston starts reading the book: war is to use up resources to maintain society’s hierarchy (continuous warfare), thoughtcrime also to maintain hierarchy [ important chapter ]
10. They get caught and taken away, Mr. Charrington is a member of the Thought Police

Part 3 (torture)



1. Winston is in prison at Ministry of Love, Ampleforth and Parsons also get put in, others come and go, get sent to Room 101; O’Brien works for the Party
2. Learning: beatings & confessions, O’Brien tortures Winston with electrical shocks, tries to convince him four is five [ important chapter ]
3. Understanding: more “teaching” sessions with O’Brien (with fewer shocks), O’Brien explains that Party seeks power for its own sake, makes him look in the mirror [ important chapter ]
4. Accepting: Winston is getting healthier, intellectually starts believing in Party, but still feelings betray him (loves Julia not Big Brother) and dreams of deceiving the Party
5. Goes to Room 101, will be tortured by rats, Winston betrays Julia, says to set the rats on her instead
6. Winston sits in cafe, he had seen Julia since their release (but they don’t love each other anymore), news of Victory in Africa 


## Characters

Winston

Tom Parsons: Party shill, stupid, smells like sweat

Mrs. Parsons

Syme: Newspeak expert, intelligent

Ampleforth: poet, works near Winston

O’Brien: knows how Winston thinks and is always one step ahead

girl with dark hair (Julia)

Katharine (Winston’s wife)

Jones, Aaronson, Rutherford: old revolutionaries, now enemies

Charrington (antique shop)
